What is Data?
Data is raw, unprocessed facts and figures without any context. 
It can be numbers, text, images, audio, etc., that represent information about 
objects, events, and their interactions.

Types of Data:
Quantitative Data: 
This type of data is numerical and can be measured. 
Examples include height, weight, age, and number of items.

Qualitative Data: 
This type of data is descriptive and conceptual. 
Examples include colors, names, labels, and yes/no answers.

Formats of Data:
Structured Data: 
	This is data that is organized in a fixed format. 
	Examples include Excel files with rows and columns, relational databases, and matrix data.
Example: An Excel file with columns for Name, Age, and Address.

Unstructured Data: 
	This is data that does not have a pre-defined format or structure. 
	Examples include audio files, video files, text documents, and PDF files.
Example: A folder containing various MP3 songs and video clips.


What is Information?
Information is processed data that is meaningful and useful for decision-making. 
It is data that has been given context and interpretation.

What is a Database?
A database is a collection of organized data that can be easily accessed, managed, and updated. 
It stores information in a structured format and allows users to perform operations 
such as retrieving, inserting, updating, and deleting data.

Why Do We Need a Database?
Databases are essential for efficiently managing large amounts of data. 
For example, a hospital can use a database to store patient records, 
doctor information, and treatment details, making it easy to retrieve and update information as needed.

Types of Databases/DBMS:
Hierarchical Databases: 
	Organize data in a tree-like structure with parent-child relationships.
Example: An organizational chart.

Network Databases: 
	Similar to hierarchical databases but allow multiple parent-child relationships, 
	forming a network structure.
Example: A university course registration system where courses can have multiple prerequisites

Relational Databases: 
	Store data in tables with rows and columns. 
	Tables can be related to each other based on common fields.
Example: A customer order system with separate tables for customers, orders, and products.

Object-Oriented Databases: 
	Store data in the form of objects, similar to object-oriented programming.
Example: A multimedia database storing audio, video, and image objects.

Database Languages:
Structured Data:
T-SQL (Transact SQL): Used by Microsoft SQL Server.
MySQL: Open-source relational database management system.
Oracle (PL/SQL): Used by Oracle databases.

Unstructured Data:
JSON (JavaScript Object Notation): Used for storing and transporting data.
Example:
json
Copy code
{
    "Name": "Solomon",
    "age": 25,
    "Address": "USA"
}
MongoDB: NoSQL database that stores data in JSON-like format.
Cassandra: NoSQL database for handling large amounts of data across many servers.
Apache Hive: Data warehouse software built on Hadoop for querying and analyzing large datasets.
Cosmos DB: Globally distributed, multi-model database service by Microsoft.


What is DBMS?
A Database Management System (DBMS) is a collection of programs that 
help users create, manage, and manipulate databases. 
It allows multiple databases to have multiple tables, and it 
provides tools to access, update, and generate reports from the data.

Examples of R-DBMS Languages:
Oracle
Sybase
T-SQL (MS-SQL Server)
Microsoft Access
Ingres
MySQL

Summary of SQL:
SQL (Structured Query Language) is a standard language for managing and manipulating databases.

Why SQL?
Data Management: Insert, update, and delete data.
Data Retrieval: Retrieve data using queries.
Structured Data Description: Define and describe structured data.
Database Manipulation: Create, alter, and drop database objects.
Advanced Features: Create views, stored procedures, and triggers.

How SQL Works:
Architecture of SQL ( This will be covered in Last Session of SQL)

SQL Command Classification:
SQL commands are broadly divided into four categories:

DDL (Data Definition Language): Deals with database objects.
CREATE: Creates a new table or database.
ALTER: Modifies an existing table.
DELETE: Removes data from a table.
TRUNCATE: Deletes all rows from a table without deleting the table structure.
DROP: Deletes a table or database.


DML (Data Manipulation Language): Manipulates data within tables.
SELECT: Retrieves data from a table.
INSERT: Adds new data to a table.
UPDATE: Modifies existing data in a table.
DELETE: Removes data from a table based on a condition.


DCL (Data Control Language): Controls access to the data.
GRANT: Gives user access rights to the database.
REVOKE: Removes user access rights to the database.


TCL (Transaction Control Language): Manages transactions within a database.
COMMIT: Saves the transaction.
ROLLBACK: Reverts changes made by the transaction.
SAVE TRANSACTION: Sets a save point within a transaction